\input texinfo @c -*-texinfo-*-

@c %**start of header
@setfilename unice68.info
@include version.texi
@include package.texi
@settitle @command{unice68}: @value{DESCRIPTION}
@finalout
@c %**end of header

@dircategory @value{INFOCAT}
@direntry
* unice68: (unice68).             @value{DESCRIPTION}.
@end direntry

@synindex cp ky
@setchapternewpage odd

@c !BEGIN INTRO
@ifinfo
This is Edition @value{EDITION} of @cite{The @command{unice68} Manual},
for @command{unice68} version @value{VERSION}, last updated @value{UPDATED}.
@c !END INTRO

@c !BEGIN COPYING
Copyright @copyright{} 1998-2009 Benjamin Gerard

Permission is granted to make and distribute verbatim copies of
this manual upon condition that the  provided the copyright notice
and this permission notice are preserved on all copies.
@c !END COPYING
@end ifinfo

@titlepage
@title unice68
@subtitle 
@sp 1
@subtitle Edition @value{EDITION}, for @command{unice68} version @value{VERSION} @value{UPDATED}
@c !BEGIN AUTHORS
@author Benjamin Gerard
@c !END AUTHORS
@end titlepage
@c @page

@ifinfo
@node Top, Unice68 Program, (dir), (dir)
@top @command{unice68}: @value{DESCRIPTION}

The @command{unice68} is used to depacker ice packed files.

@ignore
@c !BEGIN NAME
ice depacker
@c !END NAME
@end ignore

@menu
* Unice68 Program::             The @command{unice68} Program
* Options Summary::             List of command line options
* Parameters::                  Input and output
@end menu

@center manual for unice68 version @value{VERSION} edited on @value{UPDATED}

@end ifinfo

@node Unice68 Program, Options Summary, Top, Top
@section The @command{unice68} Program

@section Description
@c !BEGIN DESCRIPTION
@command{unice68} is a program to depack ice packed files.
@c !END DESCRIPTION

@c !BEGIN SYNOPSIS
@section Synopsis
@display
@command{unice68 [OPTION] [--] [<input> [<output>]]}
@end display
@c !END SYNOPSIS

@node Options Summary, Parameters, Unice68 Program, Top
@c !BEGIN OPTIONS
@section Options Summary
@table @samp
@item @option{-h}
@itemx @option{--help}
Display help message and exit.
@item @option{-V}
@itemx @option{--version}
Display version and copyright and exit.
@item @option{-v}
@itemx @option{--verbose}
Be more verbose (multiple use possible).
@item @option{-q}
@itemx @option{--quiet}
Be less verbose (multiple use possible).
@end table
@c !END OPTIONS

@node Parameters,  , Options Summary, Top
@c !BEGIN INPUT
@section Parameters
@table @samp
@item <input>
an ice packed file. If @command{<input>} parameter is @option{-}
or missing; stdin is used.
@item <output>
a regular file created containing depacked data. If @command{<output>}
parameter is @option{-} or missing; stdout is used.
@end table
@c !END INPUT

@ignore
@c !BEGIN SEEALSO
The full documentation for @command{unice68} is maintained as a
Texinfo manual. If the @command{info} and @command{unice68} programs
are properly installed at your site, the command

@command{info unice68}

should give you access to the complete manual.
@c !END SEEALSO
@end ignore

@page
@contents
@bye
