.\" This manpage 2003-2020 (C) by Christian Garbs <mitch@cgarbs.de>
.\" Licensed under GNU GPL v1 or, at your option, any later version.
.TH "GBSPLAYRC" "5" "%%%VERSION%%%" "Tobias Diedrich" "Gameboy sound player"
.SH "NAME"
gbsplayrc \- Gameboy sound player configuration file
.SH "DESCRIPTION"
This manpage describes the configuration file format of
.BR gbsplay (1).
.SH "SYNTAX"
A configuration file is a text file that may contain options for
.BR gbsplay (1)
as well as comments.
.PP
Comments are introduced by a hash mark ("\fB#\fP").
A comment continues to the end of the line.
.PP
Whitespace, including empty lines, is ignored.
.PP
An option is set by giving the option name,
followed by an equal sign ("\fB=\fP") and the option value.
.SS "Option value types"
Option values can be of these types:
.TP
.B Boolean
An integer number in decimal.
\fB0\fP is considered \fIfalse\fP, everything else is \fItrue\fP.
.TP
.B Endian
A single character denoting the endianness:
.RS
.IP \fBn\fP
native endian
.IP \fBl\fP
little endian
.IP \fBb\fP
big endian
.RE
.TP
.B Integer
An integer number in decimal.
.TP
.B Plugin
The name of an output plugin.
Run `\fIgbsplay\ \-o\ list\fP' to get a list of all available output plugins.
.SH "OPTIONS"
.TP
.BR endian " = " \fIEndian\fP
Set the output endianness.
.TP
.BR fadeout " = " \fIInteger\fP
Set the fadeout time in seconds.
Instead of cutting the subsong off hard, do a soft fadeout.
.TP
.BR loop " = " \fIBoolean\fP
Enable or disable loop mode.
In loop mode the playback will restart from the beginning
after the last subsong has been played.
.TP
.BR output_plugin " = " \fIPlugin\fP
Set the sound output plugin.
.TP
.BR rate " = " \fIInteger\fP
Set the samplerate in Hz.
.TP
.BR refresh_delay " = " \fIInteger\fP
Set the refresh delay in milliseconds.
Larger values will lower CPU usage, but things as subsong changes,
fadeouts, reactions to keypresses and the on\-screen display
will be delayed.
.TP
.BR silence_timeout " = " \fIInteger\fP
Set the silence timeout in seconds.
When a subsong contains silence for the given time,
the player will skip to the next subsong.
.TP
.BR subsong_gap " = " \fIInteger\fP
Set the subsong gap in seconds.
Before playing the next subsong after the subsong timeout,
\fIsubsong\-gap\fP seconds of silence will be played.
.TP
.BR subsong_timeout " = " \fIInteger\fP
Set the subsong timeout in seconds.
When a subsong has been played for the given time,
the player will skip to the next subsong.
A timeout of 0 seconds disables automatic subsong changes.
.TP
.BR verbosity " = " \fIInteger\fP
Set the verbosity level (default: 3).
A value of 0 means no messages on stdout.
.SH "FILES"
.TP
.I /etc/gbsplayrc
Default location of the global configuration file.
.TP
.I ~/.gbsplayrc
User configuration file.
.SH "BUGS"
If you encounter bugs, please report them via
.I https://github.com/mmitch/gbsplay/issues
.SH "EXAMPLE"
A simple configuration file might look like this:
.PP
.nf
.RS
# select NAS output plugin and play subsongs for at most 5 minutes
output_plugin = nas
subsong_timeout = 300
.RE
.fi
.SH "AUTHORS"
.B gbsplay
was written by Tobias Diedrich <\fIranma+gbsplay@tdiedrich.de\fP>
(with contributions from others, see README.md).
.SH "COPYRIGHT"
.B gbsplay
is licensed under GNU GPL v1 or, at your option, any later version.
.SH "SEE ALSO"
.BR gbsplay (1),
.BR gbsinfo (1)
